# Sparkify : Data Modeling with Postgres

## Project Description

Sparkify is a music streaming app which is interested in analyzing the data they've been collecting on songs and its users' activity. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. 

To this end, an easy way to query their data is required. Their data currently reside in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app. Accommodating their data in a Postgres database would enable their team to query their data much easier and gain powerful insights in their users' activity.

In this project, we model the data by defining a star schema with its fact and dimension tables and we write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

## Datasets

The datasets are subsets of real data from the Million Song Dataset.

### Song Dataset

Each file in the dataset is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

`song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

`{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}`

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

The schema includes the following tables.

### Fact Table
- songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
    - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables
- users - users in the app
    - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
- songs - songs in music database
    - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
- artists - artists in music database
    - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
- time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
    - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Files

- `test.ipynb` displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.
- `create_tables.py` drops and creates the tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
- `etl.ipynb` reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into the tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
- `etl.py` reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into the tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.
- `sql_queries.py` contains all the sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.

## Build ETL pipeline

1. Run `create_tables.py` before running `etl.py` to reset your tables. 
2. Run `etl.py` to read and processes the entire datasets and load their data into the tables.
3. Run `test.ipynb` to confirm your records were successfully inserted into each table.
